docs/src/input/component-box.md, before:

---
title: Box
---

A component that renders boxes.

Typically used to create:

- Bar chart
- Box plot
- Candlestick
- Gantt


## How the box component works

> This assumes that you have some basic knowledge of how scales and components work in picasso.js.
> If you don't, please read the tutorials first.

The box component, in comparison to other components, does not rely entirely on settings. 
It presumes certain values have been bound to the data, and will behave differently depending
on what data props are mapped to the component.

To create a full boxplot it requires a "major" and "minor" scale, a field to extract (major),
and props (minor) for each field. Major is similar to what a dimension would be using the
Qlik data formats, and minor is similar to one or more measures.

For a full-featured visual box plot without interactions, the properties and settings, at a minimum,
look something like this:

```js
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    extract: {
      field: 'products',
      props: {
        min: {
          field: 'lowest sales'
        },
        start: {
          field: 'low sales'
        },
        med: {
          field: 'median for sales'
        },
        end: {
          field: 'high sales'
        },
        max: {
          field: 'highest sales'
        }
      }
    }
  },
  settings: {
    major: {
      scale: 'x'
    },
    minor: {
      scale: 'y'
    }
  }
}
```

![Boxplot example](/img/boxplot.png)

### Bar chart example 
You don't need to include all of the props mentioned above, if you just specify start and end, you'll only
get a rectangle between start and end. If you specify `start`, `end` and `med`, you'll only get those, 
and not the low/high whiskers, for example.

The props do not need to be mapped to a data source either, they can be static, so to create a bar chart,
you just set start to 0:

```js
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    extract: {
      field: 'products',
      props: {
        start: 0,
        end: {
          field: 'high sales'
        }
      }
    }
  },
  settings: {
    major: {
      scale: 'x'
    },
    minor: {
      scale: 'y'
    }
  }
}
```

![Bar chart example](/img/bar-chart.png)

### Candlestick example

The box presumes 'start' values are always lower than 'end' values, and the box will
therefore render a bit weird if you try to create a candlestick chart with raw 'OHLC' values.

You should probably sort the values so the values always will be in numerical order,
but that doesn't limit you from creating a candlestick chart.

In this example, `open` and `close` is mapped to the data, and 
can be accessed these from a function created for the fill of the box.

Example:

```js
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    extract: {
      field: 'stick',
      props: {
        min: {
          field: 'low'
        },
        start: {
          field: 'open-close-low' 
        },
        open: {
          field: 'open'
        },
        close: {
          field: 'close'
        },
        end: {
          field: 'open-close-high'
        },
        max: {
          field: 'high'
        }
      }
    }
  },
  settings: {
    major: {
      scale: 'x'
    },
    minor: {
      scale: 'y'
    },
    box: {
      fill: function(d) {
        return d.datum.open.value > d.datum.close.value ? 'green' : 'red';
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Candlestick example:
![Candlestick example](/img/candlestick-chart.png)

### Out of bounds 
If a box or all of it's data is "out of bounds" i.e. outside of the renderable area, the box will not be rendered at all, 
instead the marker will display an arrow pointing towards where the box is. It's known as the "out of bounds arrow".

The OOB feature can be turned off using 

```js 
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    [data props here]
  },
  settings: {
    major: { scale: 'x' },
    minor: { scale: 'y' },
    oob: {
      show: false // turn off out of bounds arrows
    }
  }
}
```

Out of bounds arrow example:
![Out of bounds arrow example](/img/box-oob-arrow.png)


## API Reference 

{{>struct definitions.component--box.definitions.settings name='settings'}}

Commit message:

docs(box-oob): add box oob as experimental

docs/src/input/component-box.md, after:

---
title: Box
---

A component that renders boxes.

Typically used to create:

- Bar chart
- Box plot
- Candlestick
- Gantt


## How the box component works

> This assumes that you have some basic knowledge of how scales and components work in picasso.js.
> If you don't, please read the tutorials first.

The box component, in comparison to other components, does not rely entirely on settings. 
It presumes certain values have been bound to the data, and will behave differently depending
on what data props are mapped to the component.

To create a full boxplot it requires a "major" and "minor" scale, a field to extract (major),
and props (minor) for each field. Major is similar to what a dimension would be using the
Qlik data formats, and minor is similar to one or more measures.

For a full-featured visual box plot without interactions, the properties and settings, at a minimum,
look something like this:

```js
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    extract: {
      field: 'products',
      props: {
        min: {
          field: 'lowest sales'
        },
        start: {
          field: 'low sales'
        },
        med: {
          field: 'median for sales'
        },
        end: {
          field: 'high sales'
        },
        max: {
          field: 'highest sales'
        }
      }
    }
  },
  settings: {
    major: {
      scale: 'x'
    },
    minor: {
      scale: 'y'
    }
  }
}
```

![Boxplot example](/img/boxplot.png)

### Bar chart example 
You don't need to include all of the props mentioned above, if you just specify start and end, you'll only
get a rectangle between start and end. If you specify `start`, `end` and `med`, you'll only get those, 
and not the low/high whiskers, for example.

The props do not need to be mapped to a data source either, they can be static, so to create a bar chart,
you just set start to 0:

```js
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    extract: {
      field: 'products',
      props: {
        start: 0,
        end: {
          field: 'high sales'
        }
      }
    }
  },
  settings: {
    major: {
      scale: 'x'
    },
    minor: {
      scale: 'y'
    }
  }
}
```

![Bar chart example](/img/bar-chart.png)

### Candlestick example

The box presumes 'start' values are always lower than 'end' values, and the box will
therefore render a bit weird if you try to create a candlestick chart with raw 'OHLC' values.

You should probably sort the values so the values always will be in numerical order,
but that doesn't limit you from creating a candlestick chart.

In this example, `open` and `close` is mapped to the data, and 
can be accessed these from a function created for the fill of the box.

Example:

```js
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    extract: {
      field: 'stick',
      props: {
        min: {
          field: 'low'
        },
        start: {
          field: 'open-close-low' 
        },
        open: {
          field: 'open'
        },
        close: {
          field: 'close'
        },
        end: {
          field: 'open-close-high'
        },
        max: {
          field: 'high'
        }
      }
    }
  },
  settings: {
    major: {
      scale: 'x'
    },
    minor: {
      scale: 'y'
    },
    box: {
      fill: function(d) {
        return d.datum.open.value > d.datum.close.value ? 'green' : 'red';
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Candlestick example:
![Candlestick example](/img/candlestick-chart.png)

### Out of bounds *EXPERIMENTAL*

> Please note - this is an experimental feature and may be subject to change or removal without deprecation 

If a box or all of it's data is "out of bounds" i.e. outside of the renderable area, the box will not be rendered at all, 
instead the marker will display an arrow pointing towards where the box is. It's known as the "out of bounds arrow".

The OOB feature can be turned off using 

```js 
{
  type: 'box',
  data: {
    [data props here]
  },
  settings: {
    major: { scale: 'x' },
    minor: { scale: 'y' },
    oob: {
      show: false // turn off out of bounds arrows
    }
  }
}
```

Out of bounds arrow example:
![Out of bounds arrow example](/img/box-oob-arrow.png)


## API Reference 

{{>struct definitions.component--box.definitions.settings name='settings'}}
